.TH CLARIFY 1 "26 February 2014"
.SH NAME
edgepaint \- edge coloring to disambiguate crossing edges
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
[
.I options
]
[
.BI \-o
.I outfile
]
[
.I files
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B edgepaint
takes as input a graph in DOT format with node position information (the
\fIpos\fR attribute) and colors the edges in a manner making it easier to tell
them apart.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.TP
.BI \--accuracy=  e
Accuracy with which to find the maximally different coloring for each node with
regard to its neighbors. Default \fIe\fR = 0.01.
.TP
.BI \--angle= a
Color two edges differently if their incidence angle is less than \fIa\fR
degrees. Default \fIa\fR = 15.
.TP
.BI \--random_seed= s
Random seed to use. \fIs\fR must be an integer. If \fIs\fR is negative, we do
|\fIs\fR| iterations with different seeds and pick the best.
.TP
.BI \--lightness= "l1,l2"
Only applies for the "lab" color scheme: \fIl1\fR and \fIl2\fR must integers,
with 0 <= \fIl1\fR <= \fIl2\fR <=100. By default, we use "0,70".
.TP
.BI \--share_endpoint
If this option is specified, edges that share a node are not considered in
conflict if they are close to parallel but are on the opposite sides of the node
(around 180 degree).
.TP
.BI \-o " f"
Write output to file \fIf\fR (default: stdout).
.TP
.BI \--color_scheme= "c"
Specifies the color scheme.  This can be "rgb", "gray", "lab" (default); or a
comma-separated list of RGB colors in hex (e.g., "#ff0000,#aabbed,#eeffaa")
representing a palette; or a string specifying a Brewer color scheme (e.g.,
"accent7"; see https://graphviz.org/doc/info/colors.html#brewer).
.TP
.B \-v
Turns on verbose mode.
.TP
.BI \-?
Print usage and exit.

.SH BUGS
At present, \fBedgepaint\fR does not handle graphs with loops or directed
multiedges. So, a graph with edges \fIa -> b\fR and \fIb -> a\fR is acceptable,
but not if it has edges \fIa -> b\fR and \fIa -> b\fR or \fIa -- b\fR and
\fIa -- b\fR. Ports are ignored in this analysis, so having \fIa.x -> b\fR and
\fIa.y -> b\fR is also not supported.
.SH AUTHOR
Yifan Hu <yifanhu@yahoo.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
gvmap(1), sfdp(1), neato (1), dot(1)
.PP
