***************************
Line Interaction Treatments
***************************

TARDIS currently offers different ways to handle line interactions, which may be
activated via the YAML configuration file. Independently of the chosen
treatment, a number of steps are always carried out when a Monte Carlo packet
performs a line interaction. Since TARDIS adopts the indivisible energy packet
formalism (see :doc:`Discretization <discretization>`), the packet will have the
same energy in the co-moving frame after (f for final) the line interaction as
before (i for initial). Thus, after accounting for the frame transformations

.. math::

    \varepsilon_f = \varepsilon_i \frac{1 - \beta \mu_i}{1 - \beta \mu_f}

holds. Also, TARDIS treats that the re-emission of the line interaction
as an isotropic process. Thus,

.. math::

    \mu_f = 2 z - 1.


.. note::

    In the Sobolev theory, the re-emission direction is given by the so-called
    Sobolev escape fraction, with is in general non-isotropic. However, in the
    special case of homologous expansion, isotropy is retained.

.. note::

    Strictly speaking the re-mission process occurs in the local co-moving
    frame. Thus, the so called angle abberration effect should be taken into
    account when transforming into the lab frame. However, TARDIS, currently
    neglects this effect.

Essentially, the different line interaction treatments only determine how the
frequency of the packet after the line interaction is determined.

Resonant Scattering
===================

The simplest line interaction mode assumes that all interactions with atomic
line transitions occur resonantly. This implies that in the co-moving frame the
emergent packet frequency is equal to the incident one. Again accounting for
the Doppler factors due to the frame transformations between co-moving and lab
frame, the post-interaction frequency is given by

.. math::

    \nu_f  = \nu_i \frac{1 - \beta \mu_i}{1 - \beta \mu_f}

Downbranching
=============

The so-called downbranching scheme, introduced by :cite:`Lucy1999a`, is an
elegant approach to approximately account for fluorescence effects. In this
scheme, the packet is not re-emitted in the same transitions as it was absorbed
in. Instead, it now can emerge from any line transition linking the activated
upper energy level to a lower one. For any specific line interaction event the
re-emission channel is probabilistically selected according to the branching
ratios of the different allowed de-excitation transitions. For more details
about the downbranching scheme, we refer to :cite:`Lucy1999a` and
:cite:`Kerzendorf2014`.

Macro Atom Scheme
=================

Finally, as the most sophisticated line interaction treatment, a simplified
version of the Macro Atom scheme of :cite:`Lucy2002` and :cite:`Lucy2003` is
implemented in TARDIS. This approach provides a more accurate representation of
fluorescence processes and multi-line effects. Once a Monte Carlo packet is
absorbed in a certain line transition (macro atom activation), an arbitrary
number of internal jumps up and downwards may be performed. One may think of
them as changing the energy level which is excited. At any point during this
process, there is the change that the internal jump procedure terminates and
that the packet is re-emitted in a transition linking the currently excited
upper energy level to a lower one (macro atom deactivation). Again, all
involved processes are governed by probabilities reflecting the different line
transition strengths, radiative emission and absorption processes. More details
about the implementation of the Macro Atom scheme in TARDIS is provided
:doc:`here <../physics/plasma/macroatom>`. For more background information and
an in-depth derivation of the scheme, we refer to :cite:`Lucy2002` and
:cite:`Lucy2003`.

Comparison
==========

The different levels of sophistication are illustrated in the following plot,
taken from :cite:`Kerzendorf2014` and showing the incident and versus the
emergent wavelength of Monte Carlo packets in line interactions. The left panel
shows the situation in the resonant scatter mode, the middle one for the
downbranching scheme and the right one the macro atom results.

.. image::
    ../graphics/scatter_downbranch_ma.png
    :width: 700
