******************
Packet Propagation
******************

The bulk of a Monte Carlo Radiative Transfer calculation is spent on
determining the propagation history of the different packets. After a packet is
initialised, it is launched and may then perform interactions with the
surrounding material. This occurs again in a probabilistic manner. The packet
propagation is followed until it escapes through the outer boundary of the
computational domain at which point the packet contributes to the synthetic
spectrum, the main product of a TARDIS calculation. The different spectral
features are simply a combined product of the changes in the packet properties
induced in the radiation-matter interactions.

Initialization
==============

During each TARDIS Monte Carlo simulation cycle, a large number :math:`N` of
Monte Carlo packets is initialised at the lower boundary of the computational
(i.e.  the photosphere). Since the inner boundary is currently treated as a
black-body in TARDIS, :math:`N` packets with energies

.. math::
    \varepsilon = \frac{4 \pi R_{\mathrm{phot}}^2 \sigma_{\mathrm{R}} T_{\mathrm{phot}}^4 \Delta t}{N}

are initialised (the black body temperature :math:`T_{\mathrm{phot}}`, the
photospheric radius :math:`R_{\mathrm{phot}}`, the Stefan-Boltzmann constant
:math:`\sigma_{\mathrm{R}}` and the physical duration of the simulation
:math:`\Delta t` appear here). To commence the packet propagation, each packet
is assigned a initial propagation direction (recall that :math:`\mu = \cos
\theta` with :math:`\theta` being the angle enclosed by the photon path and the
radial direction)

.. math::
    \mu = \sqrt{z}

and an initial frequency :math:`\nu` in random number experiments, using a
Random number generator which provides uniformly distributed numbers :math:`z`
on the interval :math:`[0,1]`. The frequency assignment is more involved than
selecting an initial propagation direction, since the Planck function has to be
sampled. TARDIS uses the technique described in :cite:`Carter1975` and
summarized in :cite:`Bjorkmann1999` for this purpose.

Propagation in a spherical domain
=================================

Once the initial packet properties are assigned, the propagation process
commences. Without interacting, a packet, like a photon, will propagate on a
straight trajectory.

.. note::
    Since TARDIS is designed for systems for which the Newtonian limit may be
    safely applied, no general relatistic effects which would force photons on
    curved trajectories are included.

In spherical geometry, this propagation process may be illustrated by the
following sketch (taken from :cite:`Noebauer2014`):


.. image::
    ../graphics/spherical_symmetry.png
    :width: 400


The packet starts the propagation at :math:`r_i` along the direction
:math:`\mu_i`. After covering a distance :math:`l`, the packet is now located
at

.. math::
    r_f = \sqrt{r_i^2 + l^2 + 2 l r_i \mu_i}.

Note that the propagation direction has also changed and now takes the value

.. math::
    \mu_f = \frac{l + r_i \mu_i}{r_f}.

Numerical and Physical Events
=============================

As a packet propagates through the computational domain, a number of events may
trigger changes in the packet properties. Naturally, physical radiation-matter
interactions are such events. These always occur after the packet has covered a
distance corresponding to the optical depth (see :doc:`Random Sampling
<randomsampling>`)

.. math::

    \tau = -\log z,

which is again assigned probabilistically, in accordance with the stochastic
nature of the Monte Carlo approach. Translating the optical depth to the next
interaction into a physical distance is not straight-forward in the presence of
frequency-dependent interaction process such as atomic line interactions. The
detailed procedure is outlined in the following section.

In addition to the physical processes, numerical events which are a consequence
of the spatial discretization of the computational domain require interrupting
the propagating process. In TARDIS, as in many other numerical codes, physical
quantities are stored on a discrete mesh. Within the different cells, which in
our case are radial shells, these discrete values determine a (spatially)
constant plasma state. As a consequence, whenever a packet propagates into a
new cell, important quantities which are relevant for performing
radiation-matter interactions have to be re-evaluated in accordance with the
new state of the ambient material. Thus, during the packet propagation, the
distance to the next radial shell is tracked to predict when the packet crosses
into a new shell. Special care is taken at the edges of the computational
domain. If a packet crosses back into the photosphere, it is discarded. Its
propagation is stopped and it is no longer considered. Instead processing the
next packet of the population is started. Similarly, the propagation is stopped
if the packet escapes through the outer surface of the domain. However, in this
case the packet contributes to the final emergent spectrum (see :doc:`Spectrum
Formation <virtualpackets>`).

Physical Events
===============

As noted above, translating the optical depth, which determines when the next
physical interaction occurs, is non-trivial as soon as frequency-dependent
processes are considered. Currently, TARDIS incorporates the electron
scatterings and interactions with atomic line transitions. These two
interactions mechanisms constitute the main sources of opacity in Type Ia
supernovae.

Since the main focus of TARDIS is to calculate optical spectra,
electron-scatterings are treated in the elastic low-energy limit as classical
Thomson scatterings. In this case, the electron scattering process is frequency
independent. It's opacity only depends on the number density of free electrons
:math:`n_e`

.. math::

    \chi_{\mathrm{T}} = \sigma_{\mathrm{T}} n_e.

The Thomson cross section :math:`\sigma_{\mathrm{T}}`, which is a constant,
appears here. As a consequence to the frequency independence, a Monte Carlo
packet accumulates optical depth along a path of length :math:`l` due to
Thomson scattering according to

.. math::

    \Delta \tau = \sigma_{\mathrm{T}} l.

The situation is complicated by the inclusion of frequency dependent
bound-bound interactions, i.e. interactions with atomic line transitions.
Photons and thus Monte Carlo packets can only interact with a line transition
if their frequency in the co-moving frame (see :doc:`Reference Frames
<../physics/referenceframes>`) corresponds to the energy difference between the
atomic levels linked by the transition, i.e. if it comes into resonance. As a
photon/packet propagates through the homologously expanding ejecta, its
co-moving frame frequency is continuously red-shifted. Thus, during its
propagation through the SN ejecta, a photon/packet may come into resonance with
many line transitions. This and the fact that line transitions have a finite
width given by the line profile function (in the case at hand, this width is
mainly given by thermal broadening) would render the determination of the line
optical depth accumulated along the photon/packet trajectory a complicated
task.  Fortunately, the typical conditions in supernova ejecta warrant the use
of the so-called Sobolev approximation (see :doc:`Sobolev Approximation
<../physics/sobolev>`). Roughly speaking, this approximation replaces the line
profile function with a :math:`\delta` distribution around the natural line
frequency. Thus, photons/packets may only interact with a line transition if
their co-moving frame frequency exactly equals the natural frequency of the
line. The location at which this occurs is referred to as the resonance or
Sobolev point. This effectively reduces the line optical depth determination to
a pure local problem.

With these assumptions, the calculation of the optical depth a packet
accumulates along its trajectory currently adopted in TARDIS proceeds according
to the following scheme (which was originally introduced by :cite:`Mazzali1993`): 
given the current lab-frame frequency of the packet, the distance to the next
Sobolev point (i.e. to the next line resonance) is calculated

Until this location, the packet continuously accumulates optical depth due to
electron-scattering. At the Sobolev point, the accumulated optical depth is
instantaneously incremented by the full line optical depth. Afterwards, the
procedure is repeated, now with respect to next transition in the
frequency-ordered list of all possible atomic line transitions. The point at
which the accumulated optical depth surpasses the value determined in the
random number experiment described above (determining the distance to the next
physical interaction), determines the type of interaction the packet performs
and at which location in the spatial mesh. The entire process is summarized in
the sketch below (taken from :cite:`Noebauer2014`, adapted from
:cite:`Mazzali1993`):

.. image::
    ../graphics/optical_depth_summation.png
    :width: 400

Three possible cases are highlighted. In the first case, the drawn optical
depth value is reached on one of the path segments between successive Sobolev
points, while the packet accumulates electron scattering optical depth. Thus,
the packet performs a Thomson scattering. In the second case, the accumulated
optical depth is reached during the instantaneous increment by the line optical
depth at one of the Sobolev points. As a consequence, the packet performs an
interaction with the corresponding atomic line transition. Finally, if the
packet reaches the shell boundary before the optical depth value necessary for
a physical interaction is achieved, a numerical event grid cell cross event is
reached (see above).

To conclude the description of the physical interaction mechanism, some details
about the changes to the packet properties in case of interactions are
provided. If the packet experiences a Thomson scattering, a new propagation
direction is assigned. Since this process is isotropic, the new direction is
sampled according to

.. math::

    \mu_f = 2 z - 1.

In addition, energy conservation has in the local co-moving frame has to be
obeyed. Thus, the packets energy and frequency in the lab-frame suffer from the
relativistic Doppler shift

.. math::

    \varepsilon_f & = \varepsilon_i \frac{1 - \beta \mu_i}{1 - \beta \mu_f} \\
    \nu_f & = \nu_i \frac{1 - \beta \mu_i}{1 - \beta \mu_f}

Here, the subscripts highlight the packet properties before (:math:`i` for
initial) and after (:math:`f` for final) the scattering. Also, the common
parameter of special relativity, :math:`\beta = v / c`, is used.

Line interactions proceed in a similar fashion. Since we assume that the
re-emission process occurs isotropically as well, the same directional sampling
as described above is used. Energy conservation again dictates how the packet
energy after the line interaction event is determined. The important difference
is the assignment of the post interaction frequency. This depends on the
selected line interaction mode (see :doc:`Line Interaction Modes
<lineinteraction>`).

.. note::

    Note that the inclusion of special relativistic effects in TARDIS is at
    best to first order in :math:`\beta`. 

Implementation: Main Propagation loop
=====================================

In summary of the concepts outlined above, the main Monte Carlo process within
TARDIS consists of successively processing all packets with represent the
radiation field emitted by the photosphere in the following way:

* initialize the packet: assign initial energy, direction and frequency
* launch the packet: now the propagation of this packet is followed until one of the termination events is triggered
* follow the propagation:
    * calculate the distance to the next shell and determine the distance to the next physical interaction
    * the packet covers the shorter of these two distances:
       * if the new shell is reached first, propagate into the shell and recalculate both distances
       * if the packet has crossed through the inner domain boundary (photosphere), terminate propagation
       * likewise in case the packet escapes through outer boundary (ejecta surface): account for contribution to emergent spectrum and terminate propagation
       * if the interaction location is reached first, propagated to this location, perform interaction and recalculate both distances
    * repeat this procedure until one of the two termination events occurs

The following flow chart summarizes this process again:


.. graphviz::

  digraph {
    start[shape="box", style=rounded, label="Start"];
    end[shape="box", style=rounded, label="End"];
    allpacketsprocessed[shape="diamond", style="", label="All packets\nprocessed?"];
    shortestdistance[shape="diamond", style="", label="Distance to next\nshell shortests?"];
    outeredge[shape="diamond", style="", label="Escaping through\nsurface?"];
    inneredge[shape="diamond", style="", label="Crossing into\nphotosphere?"];

    nextpacket[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Select next\npacket"];
    initpacket[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Initialize packet"];
    calculatedistances[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Calculated distances:\nto next cell, to next interaction"];
    crossintoshell[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Move packet into\nnext cell"];
    terminate[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Terminate propagation,\ndiscard packet"];
    interact[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Move packet to interaction location,\nperform interaction"];
    spectralcontrib[shape="box", style="rounded", label="Determine contribution to spectrum"];

    start -> allpacketsprocessed;
    allpacketsprocessed -> nextpacket[label="no"];
    allpacketsprocessed -> end[label="yes"];

    nextpacket -> initpacket;
    initpacket -> calculatedistances;
    calculatedistances -> shortestdistance;
    shortestdistance -> outeredge[label="yes"];
    shortestdistance -> interact[label="no"];
    interact -> calculatedistances;
    crossintoshell -> calculatedistances;
    outeredge -> spectralcontrib[label="yes"]
    outeredge -> inneredge[label="no"]
    inneredge -> terminate[label="yes"]
    inneredge -> crossintoshell[label="no"];
    spectralcontrib -> terminate;
    terminate -> allpacketsprocessed;

    allpacketsprocessed[label="All packets\nprocessed?"]
    nextpacket[label="Select next packet\nfrom pool"]
    shortestdistance[label="Distance to cell\nedge shortest?"]
    
  }
